Database Cognition Authoring v1

Status: R67-D1 contract with the additive R72.2 daily-governance extension.
This contract connects saved Database Evidence v1 to model-authored table FRAS.
The authoring operation still requires a declared and present Database Cognition
Volume; the independent Database Cognition Bootstrap may now create that
semantic-free lifecycle target in a Code-only Volumes repository. It extends,
but does not replace, Cognition Volumes v1, Object FRAS v2,
Database Table FRAS v1, or Database Evidence v1.

1. Authority and semantic boundary

The only ordinary Database Cognition v1 object is a base table. One canonical
database://source/namespace/table object has exactly one complete Entry:

  table_name[tag]: F:... | R:... | A:... | S:...

The host model authors the complete tag and every F/R/A/S field after reading
complete current Table Evidence and relevant migrations, repositories,
services, APIs, configuration, and tests. Current canonical Evidence is the
authority for schema facts; current source and tests remain the authority for
business semantics.

The program may discover tables, deliver complete Evidence, bind identities,
validate candidates, resolve impact, render Diff, and govern writes. It must
not generate, prefill, rewrite, shorten, truncate, delete, symmetrize, or repair
any tag, F, R, A, or S content. It must not turn a table name into F, every FK
into R, callers into A, or status/deleted_at/tenant_id/created_at names into S.
An invalid or oversized candidate returns repair_required with zero formal
Volume writes and every actionable Repair Finding from the complete batch. The
model changes only the listed candidate fields, preserves all other candidates,
and resubmits the same complete batch.

F is one core proposition. R contains only strong relationships. A contains
only stable access and contract surfaces. Each S statement is admitted only
when it is not inferable from the table name, tag, F, R, A, or ordinary schema
facts and removing it could cause an incorrect code, schema, transaction,
concurrency, lifecycle, retention, or cross-table write-order change. Physical
table size never increases FRAS limits.

Columns, keys, constraints, indexes, and partitions remain Evidence inside the
table object. Views, materialized views, triggers, procedures, functions, and
events are outside v1.

2. Existing-Volume boundary

D1 operates only when Root already declares a Database Volume and its file is
present and valid. A marker-only Database Volume is present-empty and may
receive new table Entries. D1 may add or update multiple table Entries in one
existing Database Volume.

When the Volume is absent, Maintain remains read-only. Without accepted Evidence
it returns snapshot_or_repair_evidence. With accepted Evidence it returns
bootstrap_database_cognition. The auto CLI lifecycle router, not Maintain or
D1 Apply, may then create the Database descriptor and marker-only Volume under
the Database Cognition Bootstrap contract. D1 does not create, delete, or
declare a Volume; write Root or Meta; migrate a Legacy repository; infer a
layout; or perform D2 Bootstrap.

Database Cognition Bootstrap publishes Database, Root, and Baseline in one
guarded lifecycle transaction. If the active Baseline already contains the
Root path, its raw fingerprint must equal the exact Root preimage and the
Baseline postimage advances that same binding to the Root postimage while
preserving its existing Managed Scope role. Bootstrap does not enroll a Root
path absent from the active Baseline and never treats a mismatched Root binding
as permission to repair or overwrite governance state. A later Managed Scope
transaction may reconcile only the exact canonical Root-plus-Database state
left by an older Bootstrap version; unrelated Root drift remains a conflict.

3. Cognition Binding state

Database Evidence Baseline and Database Cognition Binding are independent:

- .aoci/database-baseline.json answers which database structure snapshot was
  explicitly accepted;
- the optional database_cognition object in .aoci/baseline.json answers which
  Table Evidence SHA supports each current model-authored Entry.

The binding extension version is database-cognition-binding/v1. Each sorted
record contains object_ref, source_id, evidence_version,
table_evidence_sha256, and entry_sha256. entry_sha256 binds the exact canonical
Entry line. The extension is omitted in Legacy and older files, preserving the
existing Baseline JSON shape. It is advanced in the same in-memory Baseline and
same locked Apply/recovery transaction as the existing cognition Volume; it is
not a second Baseline or transaction system.

Given reliable current Evidence, the formal Database Entry, and this binding:

- cognition_missing: Evidence has a table but the Volume has no Entry;
- cognition_unbaselined: an Entry exists but no matching binding exists, or its
  canonical Entry hash differs;
- cognition_stale: Entry and binding exist but source identity, Evidence
  version, or table_evidence_sha256 differs from current Evidence;
- cognition_orphan: an Entry exists while reliable current Evidence for that
  configured source has no table;
- cognition_current: Entry and binding exist and both Entry and Table Evidence
  identities match;
- evidence_unavailable: reliable saved Evidence cannot be obtained;
- evidence_invalid: saved Evidence is damaged or non-canonical;
- source_disabled: the configured source is disabled.

Unavailable is never empty. Snapshot and Verify never refresh cognition
bindings. Evidence Baseline acceptance never makes cognition current. A rename
is old orphan plus new missing; no rename is inferred and no orphan is deleted.
With no configured source, Database cognition contributes no debt and no
network access.

4. Offline Maintain discovery

The existing aoci_maintain accepts optional scope values code, database, and
all, plus the additive optional intent=cognition_optimization input with its
object_refs filter, which applies only to aligned Volumes v1 Code Entries and
never to Database assessment (see `aoci-cognition-volumes-v1.txt`). In a
Volumes repository, absent scope is the ordinary path and uses the
shared governance facts to select Code, Database, both, or aligned. Explicit
scope remains an advanced compatibility diagnostic. In Legacy, absent scope
and code retain established behavior. Database assessment reads only accepted
saved canonical Evidence, the current CognitionSet, and the existing Baseline;
it never opens a database connection.

The no-argument mixed path and explicit all scope execute Code and offline
Database assessment together. They never silently treat all as Database or
hide Code debt.

Database Maintain returns requested/effective scope, the offline assessment,
current Entry, complete Table Evidence Bundle, Table Evidence SHA and safe
reference, related known Code objects, candidate_id, batch_id, Database Volume
preimage, target and remaining counts, authoring contract, and next action. In
the ordinary no-argument path, every Database-only or mixed authoring result
includes the exact formal authoring_meta, current Database dictionary, table
F/R/A/S rules, canonical database:// relation identity rules, and one complete
legal Database Entry validated by the formal parser and validator. It does not
require an earlier scope=database call. It returns no target-specific proposed
tag or FRAS field. Orphan and unreliable Evidence stop for review. An absent
Volume routes to snapshot_or_repair_evidence or bootstrap_database_cognition
according to the accepted Evidence state; a current state needs no action.

The Evidence Bundle version remains database-evidence-bundle/v1 and includes
business_data_read=false and semantic_candidate_included=false. Its next_action
is the stable machine token author_complete_model_authored_table_fras.

5. Candidate receipt and double binding

The receipt version is database-cognition-candidate/v1. It is a non-secret,
machine-owned local receipt stored below
.aoci/drafts/database-cognition/candidate-<batch_id>.json through the existing
atomic writer. It contains:

- batch_id;
- Database Volume repository-relative path and exact raw-byte SHA-256 preimage;
- a complete sorted target set;
- for each target, candidate_id, object_ref, source_id, cognition state,
  Evidence version, table_evidence_sha256, and safe Evidence reference.

The ids are deterministic, typed, length-framed SHA-256 identities. They reduce
model hash copying; they are not credentials, bearer tokens, or external
authentication. The normal model submission carries one top-level batch_id and
each unchanged candidate_id plus its complete Entry. source_sha256 is not used
to impersonate both the cognition preimage and Evidence identity. Legacy and
Code source_sha256 contracts remain compatible.

At planning and immediately under the existing write lock, AOCI revalidates the
receipt, configured/enabled source, target presence, complete canonical table
Evidence, Evidence version/reference/SHA, and Database Volume preimage. A target
table change invalidates its candidate. An unrelated table change does not
invalidate the batch when all target Evidence identities remain exact. An
unsafe reference, damaged Evidence, changed target, changed Volume, changed
configuration, or missing object fails closed.

The current non-secret source selection (engine, database, namespaces, and
include/exclude filters) must exactly match the saved source manifest. Reusing
the same source_id for a different selection makes the old Evidence
unavailable for current cognition and invalidates an outstanding candidate.
Credential environment names and timeout policy are not selection identity.

6. Deterministic multi-table batches

Actionable objects are sorted by canonical object_ref. One page is bounded by
an object count and the sum of complete canonical Table Evidence bytes. A
single table larger than the byte budget is delivered alone and is never
truncated. The machine defaults and allowed bounds are owned only by
internal/machinecontract; optional team configuration may adjust them, while
local configuration cannot override them.

Every page has one explicit complete target set. The model must submit every
target exactly once; order does not matter. Missing, duplicate, additional, or
mismatched targets reject the entire batch before formal writes. After a page
succeeds, the next Maintain deterministically returns remaining non-current
objects. Identical planning is stable, completed candidate retry is idempotent,
and planning scales without a token prediction model.

7. Existing governance Apply and recovery

Database candidates pass through the existing Impact Resolver, Projected
Cognition Validation, Diff/P-23, write lock, CAS, AtomicWrite, Baseline, Ledger,
governance receipt, and Entries Recovery. No database_apply,
database_transaction, database_recovery, second Ledger, or tenth MCP tool
exists.

Before any formal write, the entire projected CognitionSet must satisfy the
Volume marker and namespace boundaries, Meta dictionary, Object FRAS v2
format/length/item rules, identity rules, and unambiguous non-dangling
cross-Volume relations. One failure leaves the whole Database Volume unchanged.
The program never edits the candidate to pass validation.

One Database Volume postimage contains the complete multi-table page and is
written once through AtomicWriteCAS. Every corresponding binding advances in
the same existing Baseline save. A successful result cannot expose a new Entry
without its binding. If the Volume postimage exists but Baseline/binding or a
later governance effect is incomplete, the existing Entries recovery receipt
proves preimage/postimage ownership and the identical batch completes it. The
version-4 extension of that same recovery receipt retains the batch identity,
exact bounded Volume preimages, Baseline preimage identity, and exact Database
Cognition Binding targets, so it can finish the binding even
if the local candidate draft receipt is later missing or damaged. This
fallback is permitted only after the Database Volume is the proven postimage;
it never authorizes a preimage write with stale Evidence. Recovery is
idempotent. Before Baseline advancement, a policy-selected exact rollback may
restore only proven transaction Volume postimages through the existing CAS;
changed Evidence, guards, Baseline, or third-party bytes block it. A
binding-only update is an ordinary first Apply when the Entry
bytes already match; a second identical submission is a duplicate.

The same existing update transaction may combine multiple Code candidates and
one complete Database receipt batch. All candidates are applied and validated
in memory; Code Volume is written at most once, Database Volume at most once,
and the combined Baseline/Binding postimage at most once. Code-only never
writes Database and Database-only never writes Code. The fixed formal order is
Code, Database, Baseline/Binding, Receipt, Ledger, Archive.

Creating a Database Entry is permitted only in Database candidate-receipt
mode. The older source_sha256 Database update path may update an existing C3
object but cannot create an unbound Entry.

The prior C3 one-existing-Code plus one-existing-Database source_sha256 path
remains supported.

8. Status and user surface

The existing database CLI group adds:

  aoci database cognition status [--json]

It reports the stable assessment schema, configured source count, Database
Volume state, Evidence and Entry counts, all cognition-state counts,
network_accessed=false, and a next_action token. It reads only local files.
Database Maintain exposes the same assessment through the existing MCP tool.
Database alignment is not presented as overall Code or repository alignment.

The MCP tool set remains exactly nine. Ordinary Overview and check_only
semantics are unchanged. D1 adds no database connection to MCP. Only explicit
database source inspect, snapshot, or verify commands may connect.

9. Privacy and failure boundary

D1 never reads business rows or issues product DDL/DML. Candidate receipts,
bindings, Evidence Bundles, status, Ledger, D1-specific diagnostics, and test
evidence must not contain a DSN, password, token, endpoint, host, IP, username,
or business-row sentinel. Receipt I/O failures use stable machine codes rather
than interpolating absolute filesystem paths. credential_env remains only an
environment variable name and is not returned by Database Maintain. The
established MCP cognition receipt continues to report runtime_repository_root
as repository identity; D1 does not add another host-identity field.

Formal writes require valid local Evidence but do not reconnect to reproduce
it. Evidence files are content-addressed and rehashed. Path traversal,
symlinks, non-canonical JSON, duplicate JSON keys, trailing JSON, wrong hashes,
stale receipts, CAS conflicts, AtomicWrite failures, Baseline failures, and
third-party postimages fail closed or enter only the existing recovery path.

10. Explicitly unsupported

- Database Volume creation or declaration by Maintain or Entry Apply;
- Root or Meta writes;
- Legacy-to-Volumes migration;
- View, materialized view, trigger, procedure, function, or event cognition;
- program-generated or program-repaired FRAS;
- automatic production database connection;
- product DDL/DML or business-row reads;
- D2 Bootstrap, main-branch merge, or stable release semantics.
